Ethnic backgrounds are often significant predictors of blood donation patterns. Boulware et al. (2002) and Burgdorf et al. (2017) assert that in the United States (U.S.), African-Americans often exhibit lower propensities to donate blood compared to Caucasians. James et al. (2011) attribute this racial difference in the willingness to donate to distrust of the health care system in the US among African- Americans. In a multi-ethnic donor population like Malaysia, consisting of Malays (54.7%), Chinese (24.7%), Indians (7.4%), and various others races (13.2%) (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2008), it is conceivable that ethnic background may play an important role in blood donation practices. In fact, Wooi Seong (2017) observes that in the past, ethnic Chinese may be apprehensive of donating blood due to traditional beliefs that it could result in negative health effects or bad karma when visiting hospital blood banks during auspicious periods. Similarly, blood banks in Malaysian hospitals often run low during the fasting month of Ramadan given the lack of Malay donors who are discouraged from donating for health reasons. As such, while ethnic groups are included in the current study to examine its possible link with blood donation status, no a priori expectations are held.

Various studies have pointed to the role of gender as an important catalyst to being a blood donor. In these studies, males often exhibit higher likelihoods of donating and being frequent donors than females (Volken et al., 2013; Ou et al., 2015). Nevertheless, while it is important to recognise that donor frequency should be gender adjusted as the maximum number of donations permitted annually may be different for adult males (four) and females (three), other reasons may account for lower donation rates among women too. According to Veldhuizen et al. (2009) and Shenga et al. (2010), females often stop donating much earlier in their donor careers than their male counterparts. This is because women are disallowed from donating during pregnancy or breastfeeding periods, and thus quit donating permanently instead of resuming to donate later. Another possible reason accounting for lower donation rates among women include health concerns, such as iron-deficiency anaemia or low body weight (Boulware et al., 2002; Kasraian, 2010). It is therefore posited that males would exhibit higher likelihoods of being occasional or regular donors than females in the current study.